what's going on guys my name is hussain
and in this video i want to discuss
indexing database indexing it's a very
interesting topic and i think every
backend engineer
specifically if you are
involved with databases and relational
databases or any kind of databases you
need to know what indexes and
how indexings work and what is the
benefit of indexing so in this video
we'll describe what is indexing we're
going to work with indexes we're going
to work without indexing
and we're going to see how the
performance
differ whether you have an index or you
don't have an index so first of all
what is an index guy an index is
is a data structure that you build and
you assign
on top of an existing table that
basically looks through your table and
then
tries to analyze it and summarizes so
that
it it can create kind of shortcuts right
the the best way i can think of an index
is like if you you know these
uh uh if you have a if you ever seen a
character is a
handbook or phone book where you have
like thick big
book and it is labeled there's like a
label color with a
b c d until z right so
the the the letter a starts with all the
companies phone books that uh that start
with the letter a and b
so with all the b's right and c is all
the c so if you want to
look through uh find a specific company
name phone number
and you know it's like oh it's i don't
know it's called zebra
so you go immediately you go to the z
right
and then you start searching there it's
that's the simplest thing i can think of
that index right
and basically the index guys are are
are two types so far that we know of uh
something called
b3 and lsm trees
and i'm not going to go through that the
depth
of how they are constructed this is
outside the scope of this video but
essentially it's a it's a data structure
and you can look it up it's basically
allowing you to search very effectively
right
and you find quickly what you're looking
for
so guys here i have a table
called employees with around 11
million uh rows okay
it's a quite large table okay
so i have a an id field
is integer it's not null and it's
sequential so every time i insert a row
i don't touch this field it will
automatically insert and
increment the value and it's also a
primary key
that means unique right and it also
has an index by default every primary
key has an index by default
and it's a b3 index right so
that's what i have here and i also have
a name
field on this which is what doesn't have
an index it's just a bunch of characters
nothing fancy it's not really the actual
name i just spent some time
generating 100 million random strings
right so so now if i for example do
let's clear this up and do select id
from
employees where id equal
thousand i will
return the thousands id
right that's that's not fancy right so
if i do
select star it will get everything
back idn name and nn1
is the name so don't don't pay attention
to the actual name it's just the
strength and that's the idea of the
string here
so guys what i want to do here is i'm
going to go through
steps of different queries i'm going to
show you the performance of
each of these queries right in order to
do that in postgres
that's the database i'm using by the way
uh paul's grace
i'm gonna do explain analyze
which will actually explain the query
that i'm gonna do
and gonna tell me how long it took right
which is which is really neat
so i'm going to do select id from
employees where id
equal let's say 2 000 because the first
one is cached i don't want to
mess up the statistics all right so what
happened here guys
let's let's decipher what happened it
says okay
your predicate filter you're trying to
find
id 2000 that's the employee with id
2000.
you know in order i in order to find
that
i didn't go through the actual table 11
million
and i searched sequentially no i
actually
scanned the index which is way faster
because the index is always smaller than
the actual
table because it tells you that okay it
is structured in a way so that
if you search and i'm going to put an
animation here a little bit
so you can see like if i want to find id
number 2000
it starts searching okay 2000 is between
four thousand
and and one thousand so it was okay
uh let me go to this three so it goes it
goes to another three and then search
for
from another between this number and
this number so until you actually find
the number right that's
how b3s basically work right so now what
i did i
i only scanned the index which is
very very effective right he pitches
that's another interesting thing so it
says the value that i actually queried
which is the id i did not have to go to
the heap to fetch this information
because
the id since that's the only thing
you're selecting
is in the index so i just pulled it in
line that's called
inline query if the information is
available in the index
that is the sweetest query to a database
engineer
if you can put as much information as
you can in the index
so that as i as i scan the index and you
only select the led
that is the sweetest thing you can do so
the whole thing took
0.6 millisecond and uh to plan the query
and and to
to study what we go through the the i
the the fact of oh should we use the
index or should you
scan the table is a query is a decision
and that's called the planning time
the execution is the actual work to go
and do the work all right
so let's sparse things a little bit what
i want to do here in this case
i want to i want to select
3000 in this case
and you can see that took 0.1.8
what i want to do is i'm going to change
the id
5000 and instead this time i'm going to
ask for the name
and compare that cost here guys
look how long it took so
selecting only the id where you know the
id which is a kasily query
if you ask me right it's a little bit of
silicon because you know the id why are
you just selecting the id but
it's just for science guys we're doing
this for science so it's
pretty cool right it's 0.1 milliseconds
less than a millisecond which is
quite fast however when we actually
selected the name
which is a column in the table it is not
the column is not in the index it is in
the table it's in the heap it's in a
different data structure
right and in this case
it took us two stinking two and a half
milliseconds not
m not seconds two and a half millisecond
which is which is quite
fast but still database speak it's a
little bit slow
this is a slower query and you guys need
to understand when you execute these
queries what it is really mean because
i found the id in the index but i had to
jump into the table
row on disk which is a different
structure by the way the table is in
in a different place than the index the
index is a data structure
and the table is a different data
structure right table is actually the
heavier thing
we try to avoid going to the table as
much as possible because it's there's a
11 stinking million rows there
so we try not to touch it as much as pop
but sometimes we do
so what we did is we found the id and
then we
actually tried to go and seek to the
disk
i mean i have an ssd so there is no seek
we go to the page
that has this information and we
retrieve it from disk
so that's another read from this so it's
a little bit slower took us two
milliseconds
and obviously if i execute the same
thing again
it's faster why because caching because
we cache things
cache there's so many cachings going on
ssd caches the control ssd
caches the the database caches everyone
caches
so god knows what the why is faster now
right but
that's why because i'm excluding the
same query but if i
change this to something else uh
i might not get it right but you get the
idea right two milliseconds again
all right so now let's splice things a
little bit i'm going to do
explain analyze select
id from employees
where name is equal zs
let's do it oh guys are you feeling it
you're feeling it right that was
slow that was that was
deeply slow why because guess what
the name column does not have an
index and that means the only way to
actually search
through the name the value zs
is to actually go one by one and do
a sequential scan on employees
table that's the worst thing it's called
the full table scan
you want to avoid full table scans as
much as possible
however postgres tries to be a little
bit smarter by executing
multiple threads worker threads and does
does the sequential uh scan on parallel
which is
still good right so the planning took
0.83 milliseconds which is not much
because
well is does this ha does this column
which is the name equal
this will filter does this have a where
clause does this have an index
nope it does not have an index move on
full table score doesn't have a choice
all right so it went through and scanned
11 million
rows well not necessary
well yeah it is necessary i had to scan
the whole thing otherwise how do you
know that
all of them right you have to check
every single one of them which is the
slowest thing
how long did it took it took three
seconds
yikesy yike c that is
so slow yeah so it is pretty slow guys
to do this another another thing that we
notice all the time
is uh i i used to do this all the time
without knowing
this there's there is a command in sql
called like
like if you don't know hey is zs before
and after
you just add this percentage like
this is the worst query
why because it is literally
has to go through all the rows and and
and
does matching in this case right it
doesn't really matter
because we don't have an index but i'm
going to show you within index how does
it does it do right
so this what this does is it will return
all rows that have anything in the
beginning anything at the end but
has to have zid capital as small in the
middle
slow took 1.1 second
to do all that stuff but yeah still 11
million row but
we had two workers to do that work for
us all right guys all right guys so what
i want to do here is actually going to
create
an index on
i'm going to name it employees name
on employees and it is on the name
column so this was going to take some
time
to create why because guess what guys it
is building the b3
bitmap index on top of all the stuff
right so it has to fetch all the 11
million rows and
does all this magic to actually create
the the fancy
uh index
so let's wait for it all right guys we
finished
creating our index so now let's try the
same
query that we have done just without the
like just
directly equal so now if i do this query
look how fast it is still a little bit
slow
47 millisecond but damn
that was quick why because now we're
doing a bitmap heap
scan on employees right so we're using
the actual bitmap index scan on
employee's name
so we're actually scanning the
index that we created and this is way
faster because
we have fewer rows to work with and
we're gonna
actually jump between few rows until we
find exactly
what we're looking for right and
obviously guys the same thing applies
where
hey if you only pill pull the name which
is already in this
index is going to be faster than pulling
the id and the name
i'm i'm not quite sure about this maybe
this actually doesn't hit the
heap because the index the primary key
i know this is a mysql i'm not sure
about postgres but the primary key is
usually stored with every single index
in uh in in in other databases right so
the name index here the primary key will
be stored so
pulling the primary key from the name
index
will be fast because it's it's right
there right
with it so however if you're if you have
more than other tables
then we had to go to the table structure
and that will be a little bit slow
all right guys so what will happen if i
add
like here what do you think will happen
back to the slow query back to the exact
same slow query guys
why let's clear this again let's do
let's do something else
so we don't have we had the cache look
at this
back to the same slow query why because
we could not scan the index why
this is this is a lot of people make
this mistake
yeah the name column has an index
but what you did is you're not actually
asking for a
for literal value you're asking for an
expression
and there is no index
that will satisfy this expression
because
we cannot search the index on this on
this expression because
this is not a single value so
the planner quickly detects this says
okay planning time
we check less than that oh sorry the
filter
sucks and that's why you have to do
explain on your queries and see why are
they actually slow
because of this because look at this we
did a parallel
sequential scan again parallel not all
databases do parallel scanning by the
way but that
postgres though we did we had to do it
we had to go to the
stinking table and scan my 11 million
rows if i have a billion dollars it's
going to be even slower than that
so yeah going through all that stuff and
i'm going to explain all this number in
another videos because i don't want to
make this video longer than that i'm
going to make an advanced video
discussing these actual numbers what do
they mean all that stuff but
but yeah we did a parallel scan on
employees guys look at
that it's so slow we couldn't do any
lining we couldn't do any optimizations
and this is an expression obviously so
that's we had we had to
do all that stuff so we took a hit we
took a hit
despite us having an index guys despite
axe
having an index so guys that's
very quickly indexing in a nutshell in a
very very quick video i wanted to
explain of that yeah having an index
does not mean that
the database will always use it it's
gonna plan
and according the to the planner will
decide to use the index or not
it's up to you as as the engineer
uh who's executing queries against the
database
to actually give hints to the database
to actually use the index or not
right this is a bad query in general
select star is a bad query in general
why because if you because if you think
about the cost
to go to the actual disk and pull all
the information
that is expensive right really really
depends on how much like let's say you
have a blob
on a column on the field or on the table
that is expensive to pull up so if you
don't need it don't ask for it
right and only ask for things that
absolutely
there and if you can ask for things that
are in the index right
i'm going to talk about that in another
video where just like multi-column index
where you can
add other columns in the index that
you're about to create this is called
inlining where where
as i search my beautiful index my neat
efficient index
uh i want the name for example right
that's a bad example but
i want the name i am searching for the
id and i don't want the name
oh the name is right there it's just
literally sitting
in my index so i just pull it and
retrieve it to the user i don't have to
go back
on disk and find the location seek and
disk if that's the mechanical drive
or pull the page in case of ssd guys
alright guys that's it for me today i'm
gonna see you in the next one
you guys stay awesome goodbye